once you get beyond the oystercatchers
stilts and other very distinctive
shorebirds
a worthy challenge awaits you the
several dozen more typical shorebirds
but a quick glance at the huge array of
seemingly identical birds crowding the
pages of the field guide can easily lead
to despair how on earth does anyone ever
figure them out the trick is to reduce a
large field of candidates to a small
handful or even fewer it then becomes a
fairly simple job usually of checking
the plates and texts to arrive at the
correct identification here are a few
tips to help you do just that when you
try to untangle the knots of shore bird
identification your tendency may be to
rely largely on color nearly all of us
do at least until we learn that an
overemphasis on color in spite of all
the visual pleasure it gives us can lead
to a kind of dead end and bird
identification if you let your eyes go
no further than the gorgeous glowing red
color of a breeding plumage dreadknot
you will naturally have a hard time
recognizing the same bird should you
encounter it during the nine months or
so of the year when it wears a more
anonymous silvery gray that's not to
suggest that you shouldn't enjoy
breeding plumage shorebirds whenever you
see them on the contrary enjoy them to
the hilt and use their distinctive
briefly held colors as a way into a
deeper understanding and recognition of
their essential nature
let's get rid of all colors for just a
moment one thing that varies little on
birds is their shape sure they may
change postures they run and feed but a
chunky Dowager will never cast the same
shadow as a svelte Yellowlegs
when looking at shorebirds it really
helps to notice basic elements of
proportion is the head small or large is
it supported by a long neck or does it
sit squarely on the shoulders the legs
seem especially long and stilt like or
are they more proportionate
it's particularly important to pay
attention to bills shorebirds have
evolved an amazing variety of bill
shapes and sizes
each being well-suited to its owners
preferred method of foraging it makes
sense that a piping plover with its
short bill and big eyes is a largely
visual predator first spotting its
invertebrate prey then dashing over to
pluck it from the sand while a long
build small eyed stilts and piper probes
deeply through water and mud far beyond
the range of its vision feeling for its
food the turn stones use their short
spiky bells to flip over pebbles push
aside seaweed clumps or to dig down into
the sand the bill being the tool of its
ecological trade is often the most
unique indication of a shorebirds
identity even better bills tend not to
change much with age or season few of us
think of shorebirds as being
particularly vocal but most do at least
give call notes especially when flying
moreover their voices can be a big help
in identifying them a classic example is
short billed versus long billed
dowager's often regarded as a very
difficult ID to make but not if the
birds are calling a short build has a
staccato - - - while the long build
gives a sharp break eek sometimes
doubling or tripling it
some shorebirds are as distinctive in
their habitat preferences as they are in
their looks buff breasted Sandpiper an
upland Sandpiper like grass or dirt
fields more than shorelines the upland
Sandpiper also has a wonderful swooping
breeding song a few sandpipers are so
fond of rocky habitats that birders
often call them rock Piper's these
include the Tatler's the surf bird and
rock and purple sandpipers
other habitat queues are more subtle
solitary sandpipers have a fondness for
small ponds often those in or near woods
and flooded fields with emergent weeds
while the rather similar lesser
Yellowlegs tends to prefer mud flats and
more open water situations sometimes
even swimming a bit this habitat
preference isn't enough to close the
case but it can still be a valuable clue
before you even look at the pictures you
might want to glance at the range maps
in the calendar doing so can sometimes
help you differentiate even a very
similar pair like Western and semi
palmated sandpipers in late fall and
winter you're vastly more likely to be
seeing westerns as nearly all semi
pomades will have left for the tropics
behavior is often helpful to the spotted
Sandpiper doesn't always wear its
namesake spots but it gives away its
identity in the way it moves with a
trademark teetering tail-wagging gait
ever see a flock of whitish sandpipers
chasing and being chased by the waves
along a winter beach
those are Sanderlings and while you
might see a Sanderling behaving some
other way or in another habitat or see
other shore bird species chasing waves
the combination of behavior habitat and
season can allow you to make this
identification without so much as
lifting your binoculars
what about color is it of any use at all
sure it is if you notice a difference in
color that's often a great signal of a
difference in species don't forget to
consider leg color carefully too many
shorebirds have somewhat generic dusky
or black legs anything different yellow
greenish pink etc can be very important
to note beware of mud though which can
at times make any color like look
blackish as it has on this lease
Sandpiper take advantage of any
opportunity to study shorebirds
especially in flocks where you can learn
about the range of variation within a
single species as well as between
similar species and don't quit looking
if they happen to flush once you get
accustomed to following them in your
binoculars you'll be amazed at the
information you can glean from flying
birds often including very useful field
marks
finally birding with others who know
more than you can be particularly
beneficial when it comes to learning
shorebirds but be careful
once you're bitten by the shore bird bug
you may never want to go back in the
woods